The world that you're seeing isn't the
true world. All of this that I'm seeing
right now is just a virtual reality.
It's like you're born with a headset on
playing a video game. That's your
reality. But if you're the programmer
who wrote the code for the game, you
know that there's an entire world
outside of it. And as the programmer,
you can do miracles.
>> And do you think we're getting closer to
being able to edit the code?
>> That's exactly what I'm working on right
now. And we're opening up a realm of new
technologies that are far more powerful
than anything we've seen before. Like
time travel. And nuclear bombs will be
like firecrackers. and will people
suffer?
>> So, it's like Pandora's box. There's all
sorts of nasty surprises, but they also
could be miraculous. But either way,
just in the last few months, it started
to crack open.
>> So, let's talk about that.
>> Okay, so Professor Donald Hoffman is the
cognitive scientist pushing the
boundaries of how we perceive reality
and how we can unlock our full potential
as human beings.
>> According to Darwin's theory, our
sensory systems, eyes, ears, smell,
touch, are not shaped to show us the
truth. They were shaped to keep you
alive long enough to reproduce
successfully because seeing the truth
takes too much time and energy. And so
whatever reality is, it's utterly unlike
anything that I perceive.
>> What does this all mean for the nature
of how one should understand their life?
>> Well, if you're stuck in a boring world,
that's a world of your own creation.
That's not the real world. And my
conscious experiences are nothing but
what my brain creates. And so we feel
inadequate and we feel like we need to
compete with other people. But you're
the inventor of this whole thing. you
have nothing to prove and there are much
more interesting perspectives that we
can take on ourselves. So if you really
knew who you are, you would see no need
to compare or compete.
>> And is there a way for me to understand
who I am?
>> If you want to understand the truth of
who you are beyond just this headset
description of you, then you have to
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way, you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you,
>> Professor Donald Hoffman.
Do you think that the listeners of this
show, the people listening right now,
understand the nature of reality and the
world that they're looking at and see?
I think that no one even the most
advanced professionals really
understands the nature of reality and
it's one of the big open problems and
questions in science today. We all might
have ideas. We might think we know
something. Our best science suggests
that our imagination is not yet big
enough. We need to explore further.
>> What is it that you believe is the big
sort of misconception about how we
perceive reality?
>> Well, most of us think of reality as
whatever is inside space and time. We
actually know that spaceime cannot be
the fundamental nature of reality.
>> And what is spacetime?
>> So everything that you see around us,
right? the the the space between you and
me. There's maybe one or two meters of
space between you and me. That's what
space spacetime is. All all the stuff
that we can see in our telescope. Put it
that way. If you can see it in your
telescope is part of spaceime. But we
know our our best theories of spaceime
Einstein's theory together with quantum
theory tell us that spaceime cannot be
the fundamental nature of reality.
There's a small if you go small. So I
can talk about a meter.
>> Yeah. And then I can go to you know
centimeters and then you know
millimeters and then we can go you know
micrometers and and you can go smaller
and smaller. At some point you go so
small that space disappears. It it no
longer even makes sense mathematically.
It's 10 theus 33 cm. So it's actually
not that in my view it's not that small.
It's not 10 theus 33 trillion
centimeters. It's just 10 theus 33 cm.
And all of a sudden our equations tell
us um spacetime doesn't have any
effective meaning.
>> Is a proxy for the word reality in some
respects?
>> Well, for most people I think it is. For
most people they think that that
spacetime is the reality. And what I'm
saying is it's the reality that most of
us have assumed is the final reality.
And science is now telling us it can't
be. It actually and it tells us
precisely at 10 theus 33 centimeters 10
theus 43 seconds the very notion of
spaceime makes no sense.
>> Is that the same as saying that reality
as I perceive it makes no sense.
>> I'm suggesting now as a cognitive
scientist not a physicist we should
think of spaceime is just a virtual
reality headset. That's the way we
perceive in our game of life. And when
you say spaceime, you mean the the thing
that I'm perceiving with my eyes and
ears and senses right now.
>> That's right. Even this hard table is
just a VR
object. And the whole setting that we're
in here right now is just a virtual
reality. And there is a a reality
entirely outside this headset that that
is open to science to explore. And we're
finding stuff which you might call
obelisks, geometric objects outside of
spaceime. So, so this is all brand new
in the last since like 20 2010 or
something like that roughly.
>> So, do you believe that? Do you believe
that everything I'm experiencing and
seeing now is basically like equivocal
to me wearing a virtual reality headset
and that there's something beyond the
virtual reality headset
>> completely because I believe the science
and the predictions of our theories
about spaceime are so good. Now I I have
to always be careful about what I'm
saying versus and I don't want to put
words in the physicist's mouth. So when
I say I think it's a virtual reality,
that's Hoffman. That's not physics.
Right.
>> Are you able to swap out the phrase
spaceime for reality or is that
inaccurate?
>> I think that whatever reality is,
spacetime is a trivial aspect of it.
There's much more to reality than
spacetime. spacetime is all the reality.
It's it's like a a player in Grand Theft
Auto. If all you've done is play in
Grand Theft and that's you were born
with a headset on and that's all you've
that that's your reality. But if you're
the programmer who wrote the code and
you know the supercomputer that's
running Grand Theft Auto, you know that
Grand Theft Auto um is a nice
self-contained world, but there's an
entire world outside of it that's
utterly unlike Grand Theft Auto. It's
it's a supercomput with diodes and
resistors and voltages that are being
toggled. And when when some dude is
turning his wheel to to drive the car,
what's really happening when he turns
the wheel is that millions of voltages
are being toggled in a specific order in
some computer. And it has to be exactly
that right sequence for the thing to
work properly. And and the guy that's
turning the wheel has no idea what's
going on. There's this other whole realm
utterly outside your imagination in
Grand Theft Auto. And so if you're in
Grand Theft Auto, you might not even
know about computers and toggling
voltages. And so all you know is I got a
steering wheel and a gas pedal and
streets and and people to race and so
forth and things to to steal and and
whatever,
>> but you don't realize there's a puppet
master effectively controlling you
>> behind the scenes. And so I I think that
spaceime is just a very effective
headset.
>> For anyone that doesn't know, Grand
Theft Auto is a video game where you run
around a virtual world basically.
>> That's right. Yeah. Driving. You're
driving nice fancy cars in this in this
world. That's right.
So everything I see right now is a
projection that I've made on the world,
my world, in order to help me to
survive. And my brain is not showing me
things that it doesn't think I need to
see because they won't be conducive with
survival because they are cognitively in
terms of like um how much fuel and
energy they would require to process and
think about they are cognitively
inconsequential
or like it would be inefficient for me
to spend my cognitive power to see those
things.
>> That's exactly right. And for a lot of
people, I think that's counterintuitive
because they would say, "Look, evolution
is about making you fit so you can live
and survive long enough to reproduce
successfully." And surely evolution
should do that by making you see the
truth. I mean, if you see the truth,
then you're going to compete in the game
of life much more successfully than if
you don't see the truth. So, so what are
you talking about this headset nonsense
for? This is not a headset. This is the
truth. I mean and evolution should shape
us to see the truth. Now I think that's
what most people would would would
assume and in fact very intelligent
experts in the field assume that and I
suggest otherwise. In fact we have
mathematical proofs otherwise. If you
look at evolution, Darwin said, "Look,
we need to think about a gradual
evolution over time of these species,
maybe from very very simple ones to more
complex ones." And what what is going to
drive that dynamics? and and Darwin
suggested it was what we would call
reproductive fitness that that those
organisms that have
physical properties, sensory systems,
motor systems, you know, movement
systems that make them more likely to
have offspring and to raise offspring to
maturity. Whatever properties those
might be, that's what we're going to
call fitness. So the more fit you are I
is really saying how likely are you to
have and successfully raise offspring.
>> So Darwin suggested that and I don't
think that he necessarily had to say
that there was no God. It was just that
there if there is a god it's not that
God put it down perfect. He did an
evolutionary process.
>> Yeah. Well organisms adapt to their
environment. Um well they're not
adapting but the offspring that survive
are those best adapted to the
environment. That's right. So that was
Darwin's idea. So the gradual evolution
from presumably simpler organisms to
more and more complic complicated
organisms and um and then multiple
evolutions of things like eyes like the
sephopod eye evolved different
differently from the human eye. Um and
the sephopod eye got certain things
right that the human eye got wrong.
>> Is that because the sephopod eye was in
a different environment? So it had
different requirements. That would be
one possible reason. I actually don't
know in the case of the sephopause why,
but that kind of idea is absolutely one
of the reasons that that could have
happened. Another one, it could just be
an accident, right? There's probability
involved. And so there at some point you
have the right accident and then the
humans got the thing reversed.
>> So you're saying Darwin was wrong in
some respect or that he there was
something missing from his theory?
>> Oh, no. I I think Darwin's I I I in
terms of biology,
I think that there is um no serious
competitor to Darwin's theory of of
evolution by natural selection in in
terms of the scientific theory of the
the origin of species and so forth. And
it's Darwin's theory and the
mathematical formulation of it that I
think also says that what we're
perceiving is not the truth. that our
sensory systems on Darwin's theory were
not shaped to show us the truth. They
were shaped
to keep you alive long enough to
reproduce successfully. Period. That's
all Dharm's theory actually says. Most
of us think the way this evolutionary
process does it is to make sure that
your senses are telling you the truth
about the external reality. I've
published some papers with um with
colleagues where we show mathematically
that Darwin's theory does not entail
that at all. In fact, Darwin's theory
says the probability is zero
that any sensory system like eyes, ears,
smell, touch, taste has ever been shaped
to see any aspect of objective reality
truly. So the probability is zero that
you see any aspect of the truth. Period.
On Darwin's theory, what you do
experience is
sensory systems that guide adaptive
behavior. Guide adaptive behavior means
um they let you act.
>> So your eyes, your nose,
>> your eyes, your nose. Yeah. Yeah. Your
eyes and nose and they they guide you so
that you act in ways that you don't die
too quickly.
>> Okay.
>> And you can have kids that don't die too
quickly. I was just
>> that's all it's about.
>> I was just playing out the scenario then
that you removed my eyes and you removed
my ears and my nose and my ability to
sense, you know, temperature and things
like that. All of my senses. I thought
if I was the only person on Earth and
you removed all of my senses,
what would reality be? Because if you
remove my senses, reality no longer
exists as far as I'm aware of it. But
that doesn't mean nothing exists. And
I'm wondering what that nothing would be
like if you just imagine like wipe off
everyone on the earth and it's just you
and we remove all of your senses. What
what is in that space? Because you're
right, my senses, my eyes, my ears, my
ability to understand temperature is a
byproduct and consequence of me
surviving. So I was playing out this.
like, well,
if we think about ghosts and the
afterlife,
maybe there was no reason from a
survival perspective that I even needed
to be able to
see or acknowledge them. Maybe it just
didn't help. Maybe it actually would
have hurt me to have
>> um because it would have been too
cognitively demanding to process all of
that information. So, anybody that could
process all that information wouldn't
have been good at reproducing.
Therefore, they wouldn't survive.
Therefore, they wouldn't be here. So
maybe those of us that are here, we're
just really good at ignoring
the other dimensions.
That's what our mathematics says. I
think that your your intuitions on that
are are quite right that if you pay
attention to anything other than what
allows you to have kids, you're wasting
your time. From an evolutionary point of
view, perception is expensive. It takes
a lot of calories. You have to eat a lot
of food to to run your brain and to
power your eyes and your ears. And so
you need to do shortcuts. You need to
make your sensory systems not chew up so
much of your energy. The more expensive
your your perceptual systems are, the
more you've got to eat to to power
those. So that means you have to go out
there and forage and put yourself at
harm's. So it's it's it's so there's a
trade-off. We try to do things cheaply
in evolution. And going for the truth,
you don't need to actually go for the
truth cuz that's very very expensive. So
So for example, there are some
flying insects that need to lay their
their off their eggs on in in water and
they use the trick of just looking at
the polarization of the light coming off
the water. So what what you see
happening in evolution is we have tricks
and hacks and and even in humans have
tricks and hacks and for for example
trying to find out if someone is
reproductively fit right we we you you
can't I can't actually look at your DNA
and and go well okay
he's got an ACG and T but he's got a C
here where it's supposed to be a T or
you know I can't look at your DNA. So
what do I look at? I have to look at
your at your what I can see of your body
and and your voice and and so forth. So,
>> one of the most compelling arguments for
the fact that we aren't seeing reality
as it is and we're actually only seeing
what we need to see in order to survive
is when you look at, as you were saying,
as how different animals see the world
and can you just give me some examples
of some more examples of different
animals that see the world completely
differently? I always think about bats.
>> How do how do bats see the world? Cuz do
they see colors like we see them and
objects like we see them?
>> No. No. Bats use echolocation. They'll
send out little bursts of sound um very
very high frequencies and then they have
these big ears that capture the returns.
And I was just looking at their sensory
system. It says most insect eating bats
use echolocation. As you said, they emit
high frequency sound waves. Yes. And see
by listening to the echoes bouncing off
other objects. That's right. And this
gives them some kind of sonic map of
their surroundings, helping them to
navigate and effectively see in total
darkness. So you imagine a bat, right?
>> Like then they if a bat is sat there
thinking that they understand the nature
of reality when it's actually just a map
of how the sound waves bounce back. They
I imagine don't have the same
a complete they have a completely
different perception of what reality is
to us. And it's therefore it would be
quite ignorant to assume that we as
humans are seeing reality as it is when
just like the bat we've probably
adapted to
our environment and built senses eyes
ears touch that helped us to survive. I
would agree with you, but some of my
colleagues would disagree and they would
say
humans are much more complicated
and you know, surely bats and so forth,
they have to have all these shortcuts
and they don't see reality as it is, but
but we've evolved further and we're
closer to the truth. From my point of
view, what I see this table and this cup
and so forth is just a a convenient
fiction. Whatever reality is, it's
utterly unlike anything that I perceive.
utterly.
>> In a TED talk that you did in 2000 in
the 2000s, you talked about simulations
that you ran to prove that I guess in in
in part that I'm only seeing things that
will help me to survive as a creature,
as an organism. Can you explain to me
simply what what those simulations were
and what they proved?
>> Well, yes. in our in our simulations and
this is before we had theorems. So we
did simulations just to see if the ideas
were working and and we would have
artificial organisms in a computer.
Yeah.
>> So it was like a a game that we put
together and we would have a world and
and we would let some organisms actually
see the true state of that world. So
they they were the truth organisms. And
then we'd have other ones that um only
had like a a headset, an interface that
only could see not the truth, but but
just some little bit of information that
that could guide adaptive behavior
>> that would help them to survive. Yeah.
And reproduce. That That's right. What
we found was for a wide range of of
conditions of of the algorithm, the the
organisms that saw the truth went
extinct. they they weren't able to
compete the ones with the ones that
didn't. And and one of the things that
came out of it was seeing the truth
takes too much time and energy. It it's
complicated to see the truth. And if you
have a simple trick
that lets you do the same thing without
having to have a deep insight, then you
can get the same benefit. You can get
the benefit without having to put all
the the effort out. I can give you a
concrete example of a of an organism
that does this. That's that's pretty
funny. So there's the jewel beetle. It
lives in the outback of Australia. It's
dimpled, glossy, and brown. The males
fly. The females are flightless. So the
males are flying around, of course,
looking for an eligible female. It turns
out that men in the outback tended for a
while were eat were drinking beer with
these bottles that were also dimpled,
glossy, glossy, and and brown. They
throw them out into the into the outback
and they turned out to be dimpled glossy
in just the right shade of brown to grab
the attention of the male jewel beetles.
They're they're actually on the bottle.
They're full body contact. They're
crawling all over it and they still
think it's a female. So, how much do
they know about their women? Very, very
little they know about their women. The
a woman a female is something dimpled,
glossy, and brown. Apparently, the
bigger the better. And that's what a
female is. So you can see evolution
didn't give these male beetles much
insight into their females. They gave
them just enough information to
successfully reproduce. Period. And
that's sort of what evolution does. It
it gives you just enough information to
um reproduce before you die.
>> So they're all making love to this beer
bottle because they can't tell. They
can't see
>> That's right.
>> reality. They can't see that this isn't
a woman. This is a beer bottle.
>> That's right. That's one of the more
humorous examples of of what evolution
has done. It does things on the cheap
and that includes human sensory systems.
So, it's it's very humbling. We're not
the epitome. And what we think is human
appreciation of the deep truth of
reality is just our little headset. What
we experience and know is
trivial compared to whatever reality is.
Absolutely trivial. We know 0% of
reality.
And our by the way, our scientific
theories
will always and forever explain 0% of
reality because
they have to make assumptions. And every
theory, scientific theory has to make
assumptions. And so we're going to have
an in we'll have in principle an
infinite sequence of theories with ever
deeper assumptions and we'll never get
to the bottom. And since it's an
infinite sequence, that means everything
we got so far is 0%.
So I I'm a scientist. I'm all for
science. I encourage young men and women
to go into science. I think it's a great
thing to do. Um but just know that um
all of our theories will
comprehend 0% of reality.
>> You know, people talk a lot about how
their pets or other animals are able to
see another dimension. Sometimes people
say things like, "My dog started barking
at this," or, "I had cancer." And
there's dogs or animals that have been
able to um they they believe spot
certain diseases inside the human body.
And when you look at the
sort of sensory faculties of these dogs,
dogs can hear frequencies up to 65,000
hertz, whereas humans can only go to
20,000 hertz. Dogs have up to 300
million of receptors. Humans just have 5
million. And some animals like cats can
see different sort of frequencies of
light. So it does it does beg a
question, you know, if it's possible for
an animal, an organism to see the world
in a different depth and width than us,
right?
>> What what happens if you go further?
>> Right. Absolutely. There are some that
can detect electric fields. So some fish
can detect electric fields. Um, some
birds, I believe, can see the
polarization of light and some some uh
insects of course use polarization of
light to to find where to lay their
eggs. So, and and we can't do that. So,
so yeah, when we start to study other
animals, we see these remarkable
abilities.
>> Interesting. And what does um what does
this all mean for the nature of how one
should understand their life? Because I
guess the way the way that we perceive
the world causes us so much suffering or
joy depending on how we perceive it. Is
there anything people from all of the
work you've done and the books you've
written that people can bring into their
lives to help them live better lives
with this understanding of the world?
>> First thing to note is that the world is
far more interesting and varied than you
can imagine. So if you if you think the
world is a boring place, it it's not.
Your imagination isn't big enough.
Whatever reality is, it it transcends
anything that you could possibly
imagine. Spiritual traditions basically
often say there's more to life than what
you see inside space and time. There's
something beyond.
And I've been sort of pointing to that
myself in my own way. I'm saying that
scientific theories always have
assumptions. So there's an infinite
number of scientific theories that you
can have and you're never going to get a
scientific theory of everything. What am
I saying? that there's something beyond
science. As good as science is, I'm
saying there's not only not a theory of
everything, the best theory we'll ever
come up with is 0% of reality. So that
leaves all this room for what the
spiritual traditions are talking about
that there's something that trans
transcends science. There is a a way of
thinking about this that I think is very
illuminating and it's about the inter
intersection of science and
spirituality.
I'm a scientist. Who who am I? I I am
someone and and I'm one of many
someone's other scientists who can
create theories and in principle even
ever deeper theories and there is an
infinite sequence. So who is the eye
that can do this?
No theory that I can come with come up
with is the final description of that
eye. In other words, the eye that is
doing all this theory building is the
eye
that is real,
that is making these theories, and that
utterly transcends all these theories.
And that's a spiritual point of view.
>> So what does that mean? You're you're
God.
>> It means that whatever you are
transcends any description. And that's
what a lot of people say God is. Suppose
I give you something you've never tasted
before, like a piece of mint. And
actually, I don't know what mint tastes
like to you. I I assume that it's like
what mint tastes like for me, but I
don't know. This is called learning by
ostensive definition. And so, we have
this game where your experiences are
your experiences.
And you actually
didn't need anybody else for those
experiences. All you needed me for or
your parents for is to give you a name
for what you already knew. And and you
you create this this world and all we do
is tell you how to talk with me about
what you've created. And I don't know
that your world
in any way resembles my experience. It's
quite possible. And do you think there's
ways that we cause ourselves a lot of
anguish and pain and mental health
issues because of how we perceive the
nature of reality to be that we could
potentially I don't know give up or
rewire ourselves on to have a have a
more fulfilling more grateful experience
of life
>> completely. I think that's very very
important and it's a natural consequence
of what we've just been talking about.
Almost all of us think of ourselves as
an object in spaceime only here for a
short amount of time and will soon die.
When I say you transcend any scientific
theory, that means the theory that I
am just a 160lb object in spaceime is
just a theory and it's not the truth.
That's not the truth about who I am.
That's just a theory that I have because
spacetime itself is just a theory.
Nothing inside spacetime is anything but
my headset interpretation of a reality
that infinitely transcends anything I
can experience. There is another way
that you can appreciate that that's that
transcends science and that is um and
this many meditative traditions talk
about this. They recognize that you
are infinitely
beyond any scientific or any other
description. So what do you do in that
case to know who you are? You drop all
descriptions. You sit in absolute
silence and ignore any thoughts because
you recognize thoughts are useful in
this headset. And to play the game of
life, yeah, we need thoughts to do our
science. We need to if you want to
understand who I am
again I do psychology I do all this I'll
do the scient so I'm not putting science
down I'm a scientist but at some point
if you want to understand the truth of
who you are beyond just this headset
description of you then you have to lay
aside all concepts period and just know
yourself by being yourself not by
putting a concept between you and
yourself.
>> A story.
>> An identity.
>> That's right. No, no story. No ident.
You You know yourself by sitting in
utter silence and being yourself. No
concepts because then you've let go of
all theories. And now it's reality
facing reality. No barrier in between.
And that requires you to realize that
your identity, the stories you believe,
the labels you've given yourself as CEO
or social media manager or manager or
director or head of department, all of
these things are just in fact labels
you've given.
>> That's right. Those are all just labels
that you given. And what's interesting
about this now is if I think I'm just
this little body and I'm nothing but
this body and and my conscious
experiences are nothing but what my
brain does. So, so that's my theory and
that's that's all I am. I don't feel
very big. I don't feel very important.
Um, and so I'm going to probably need to
do something to make myself feel a
little bit better and I'm going to need
to compete with you. I'm going to need
to show how I'm better than you in
certain ways. So, I'm I'm a better
tennis player than you or I'm smarter
than you or or whatever. So we're going
to get this competition going on where
among people and we're going to get even
competition among religions and
countries and so forth because we don't
know who we are and and we feel
inadequate
and if we actually understood that
all of this that I'm seeing right now
I'm making it up
on the fly. This cup that I'm seeing, it
only exists when I create it. This table
exists when I create it. Like in a
virtual reality, if I in a virtual
reality, I'm in Grand Theft Auto. I look
over here and I now I see a red Mustang.
I look away, I don't see the red
Mustang. And now there is no red
Mustang. The red mustang only existed
when I looked because it's a VR game. I
only need it when I ren I I render it
when I need it. I'm now rendering a cup.
that the cup that I rendered is no
longer there. You might render your cup.
You might say, "Well, no, Don, you're
wrong. The cup is still there. I can see
it." No, you're rendering your cup. And
so you you're you're not rendering my
cup. I rendered my cup. So the same
thing with Grand Theft Auto. You might
say, "Well, I see the red Mustang even
if you're not looking, Don." Well,
that's because in your headset, you're
looking and you're rendering a the red
Mustang, but I'm not. And there is no
red Mustang. If you look inside the
supercomputer, there's no red Mustang
there. The the supercomputer that's
running the game has no red Mustang. So
what I'm saying is we compete, we feel
inadequate and we feel like we need to
compete with other people and be better
than them and we have egos. All the
egoic stuff that we do that causes all
the problems in the world because you
don't know who you are.
You're creating this whole thing. You're
you're you're not a little player.
You're the inventor of this whole thing.
You have nothing to prove
and you don't need to be better than
anybody else. They're also master
creators. They're creating entire
universes that they perceive as well.
And my own take on on this is that you
and I
are really the same one reality just
looking at itself through two different
headsets, two different avatars and
having a conversation. And maybe that's
what you is required for this one
infinite intelligence to sort of know
itself. What you if you're if you
transcend any description, what how do
you know yourself? Maybe what you do is
you say, "Well, let me try this headset
on. Let me take that seriously for a
while. Maybe even let myself get lost
and let me let me completely believe I'm
just a Don Hoffman in in in this
spaceime and let me believe that for for
many decades and then slowly sort of
wake up. But at least then I will have
seen myself from this perspective. Then
I'll take off that headset." We call
that death. We all just take off the
headset and then I'll try. There's an
infinite number of headsets to try on.
So from that point of view, any person
you speak to is transcendent. Any animal
is just an avatar of this transcendent
unspeakably incredible
reality that transcends science so that
science will only get 0% of it. And
again, I always say I'm not putting down
science. I'm a scientist. We need to do
science and I recommend that people do
science. But my guess this is one of the
more trivial headsets. It's only four
dimensions. Why not 20 billion? Why not
quintilion? This is this is just a a
fairly trivial. So we we may be in one
of the most the more uninteresting
perspectives on who we are. And and and
there are much more interesting
perspectives that we can take on oursel.
But but the reason we have fighting, the
reason we have egos is because we don't
know who we are. And is there a way for
me to understand who I am
or is the closest you've found
meditation? I know you've meditated for
20 years or something.
>> I I should say I should be a little
careful about I think it really is
important to do for for me as a
scientist to have done the science that
I've done. But I think for someone else
who doesn't do science, maybe that you
do music or you do some sports or
something like that. That's that is a
concrete way of knowing yourself through
a perspective and that's really
important and and and since we have
billions of people and then there's
untold other kinds of animals and
insects and so forth. This this one
infinite intelligence whatever it is has
decided I want to look at myself through
the lens of a mosquito and now of the
bumblebee and now of the the jewel
beetle that that can't even tell a
bottle from from a female. I'm going to
look at myself from this paniply of
perspectives.
>> So you're almost implying there that
there's this one consciousness and it's
just using different organisms
potentially as vehicles to understand
itself and the nature of reality.
>> That's right. So that would mean that me
and you are the same consciousness, but
you were born as a scientist in America
and I was born as a I don't know an
entrepreneur in Botswana with different
perspectives in order to understand the
reality which means that we're basically
the same
>> right
>> the same consciousness the same super
intelligence or whatever just
manifesting as different eyeballs in
different places. That's my my view and
certain religious traditions do sort of
hint almost say that exactly um you know
like Jesus
uh in Christianity in like Matthew 25
says you know I was hungry and you fed
me. I was thirsty you gave me something
to drink. I was a foreigner and you
invited me in. I was sick and you helped
me. I was in prison and you visited me.
And people he says said asked him when
did we do that? And you said whenever
you did it to the least person you did
it to me. So Jesus is sort of hinting at
this. There is
there's no difference. The reason to
love your neighbor as yourself is
because your neighbor is yourself just
with a different headset. And the only
reason we have problems is we don't
realize how incredible you are. So you
are that which is creating this
VR
simulation with all of its beauty, all
of its complexity. All the complexity is
you and you're doing it effortlessly.
Now for my
neuroscience colleagues, they will say,
"Don, it's not effortless. You've got
100 billion well 86 billion neurons in
your brain. visual system has billions
of neurons that are doing all this
computation and you we have the simple
cells, the complex cells, the hyper
complex cells and we think of the brain
as a physical object that's generating
our consciousness. Yeah,
>> I'm saying spacetime itself is something
that you create and so you create
everything inside spaceime and
>> I've also created the brain.
>> You create the brain. So right now you
don't have a brain.
>> Excuse me.
>> And nor do I.
>> Okay, fair enough. because I don't
because I don't have a brain and you
don't have a brain until we actually
look inside and render a brain. Just
like in in VR, the the Mustang doesn't
exist until you look at it and render
it. So if if I I can predict that if we
do the right scans, we will see a brain.
But that only exists when we
when we do the rendering. So I don't
have a brain. All these correlations, we
know that correlation doesn't cause
doesn't imply causation, right? So we
the fact that there is correlations and
I don't deny it. In fact, I'm all for
studying these correlations between
brain activity and conscious
experiences. They exist. They're
undeniable and they don't in any way
remotely entail that the brain causes
our conscious experiences.
>> So I'm not the brain. I'm the thing
that's simulating the presence of a
brain.
>> That's right. That's right. And so in
your simulation, your simulation is so
good that it simulates also how all this
reality that transcends spaceime is
being funneled down into this tiny
little space-time headset. And that's
what we call the brain. So of course
there going to be these correlations
between brain activity and what we see.
But the correlation goes the other way.
It's not because the brain creates your
conscious experiences. is because
consciousness has created the brain as
an icon to describe how it's how it's
creating this headset.
>> Do you think much about simulation
theory? I've had lots of uh dinner
parties recently and conversations over
dinner about simulation theory and it
always gets very very interesting. Um
what are your thoughts on simulation
theory? And for my listeners who might
not understand the concept of simulation
theory, are you able to explain it? Yes,
the the so the standard uh Nick
Bostonramm for example is is a very big
figure in simulation theory and and in
those kinds of simulation theories the
idea is that the world that you're
seeing right now isn't the the true
world. This is just a simulation and
there's some
programmer say with some really nice
computer that's programmed this world.
And so we're you're just we're just
characters in a simulated world of some
programmer. And that programmer on their
laptop that's doing this, as it turns
out, isn't the final thing either
because that programmer in their laptop
is also just a simulation from a deeper
level programmer on their laptop. there
could be the very very large nesting of
all these simulated worlds and and
people with their computers and that
does jive pretty well with what I'm
saying up to a point. I'm saying this is
not the reality. This is just a headset.
So, but there's a big big disagreement.
Do you think we're there's going to come
a point where with everything that's
going on with AI and robotics that we
could get make a robot um program it
with a certain AI that gives it the sort
of same thinking as a human being and
then when I put some chocolate into its
mouth it's going to say to me I love
that chocolate Stephen that's my
favorite flavor
>> I could certainly program such a robot
but the question will always be just
because I have this particular circuit
in the in the computer
and you know then some structure in the
tongue that I've given it in some
pattern electro activity. What is my
scientific theory that explains why that
pattern had to be the taste of
chocolate? That's what we need as
scienting
thing where it's just learned through
all of the data through someone telling
it programming it to think that
particular set of chemicals um send that
up to the software and then respond like
this which might just be how me and you
responding to life. We might not be
conscious at all.
>> Right? And and what you're suggesting is
probably how we would actually do it,
like we would probably sort of train it
and and and have it give us the right
responses in in that kind of context. So
we'd probably do it something like that.
But but then as scientists, we want to
understand. So we're claiming as
scientists
that an experience is a say certain
causal structure or certain functional
functional architecture. That's what
we're saying it is.
>> Because we because these these are
physicalist theories and they're they're
saying we're not going to start with
consciousness. Consciousness is not
fundamental. Space and time and physical
objects are fundamental. And so we we
need to show how those physical objects
and their properties give rise to these
conscious experiences. So if that's if
that's the science you want to propose,
then I have to be hard-nosed as a
scientist now and say give me your
theory of mint. So do you think this is
a simulation?
>> So it's it's not a simulation in
Bostonramm sense. In Boston sense it's a
simulation in that it's a physical
substrate that's giving rise to this
whole world of conscious experiences
that I'm having.
>> Yeah. So it's that I deny
>> like a game programmer sat at a computer
making it
>> and that and somehow the physical system
itself gave rise to the magic of the ex
the conscious experiences I'm having of
red and green and love and so forth
those conscious so for the simulation
theory so this is my p my bone of
contention with the simulation theory
it's very similar to my theory in in all
other respects but this is a pretty
serious bone of contention for their
theory to to work they have to show
explicitly scientifically how a
conscious a specific conscious
experience arises from a specific
program.
>> Until you do that, this is there is no
beef on the table.
>> Right? So for my point, their their
theory is a non-starter right now
because there's no specific experience
that they can say this program must be
the taste of mint. They can't do that.
And until they can do that, they can't
get this whole world of experience that
I'm living in. Nothing. So there's no
beef.
All they have to do to give me some beef
is to say like in integrated information
theory they say here's the matrix for
mint. This is the matrix. Of course then
we'll ask
why. Why is that matrix that causal
structure the taste of mint? what is
your scientific theory for why that's
the and what you'll see is
I think I think it's going to take the
field a while to see it but we will find
that these approaches are vacuous
there's no beef
>> when you ask people what the meaning of
their life is they'll often say things
like it is maybe they'll say to raise
children maybe they'll say they want to
improve humanity they want to um cure a
disease they want to um help society in
some way but through the lens of reality
that you see the world and that you
believe the world is what becomes the
meaning of life. Donald,
>> that's a great question. I do think that
the best description I can give is that
there is this one transcendent infinite
consciousness and you and I are just
avatars and so is a mosquito and so is a
bacterium. And all are equally
interesting and important and all are
different perspectives, just different
headsets. There's the mosquito headset.
There's the jewel beetle headset.
There's all these different headsets.
And
I'm I'm in the Hoffman headset. Happen
to
do science. I'm not good at art. I'm not
good at at music and so forth. I have my
my my particular talents and and in
inabilities in my headset. So, I'm here
to experience the Don Hoffman
perspective on things.
>> Why?
because that's perhaps the only way the
infinite can know itself is through an
infinite number of perspectives. It it
transcends any particular perspective.
So
why not get lost in the hoffen
perspective and a jewel beetle
perspective and and all these different
perspectives and
that's
the only way to to know yourself. But
it's always
the one consciousness that's knowing
itself through an infinite number of
varieties
of of experiences of headsets.
>> And did someone or something create that
one consciousness?
>> Now I'm above my pay grade. It's uh
that's a no no that's of course the
right question and
it asks for an explanation
and
the only explanations we have are either
mathematical or scientific or both. The
only really deeply serious testable
but but even informal explanations make
assumptions. And so I'll have to say
that that you're asking a question about
an entity that transcends any
description, namely who you really are
and who I am I really am.
And I think we can I think you can know
the answer to your question in in one
way and that is
dropping all concepts and just being
with your being. You are that
you are that. You don't need to attain
anything. You don't need to achieve
anything.
You're that right now. So there's no
effort. There's no no need to get better
at anything. It's just to recognize what
you already are. You've let yourself be
under an illusion that I'm just this
little guy that needs to do these things
and, you know, and be a professor and
whatever it might be. I've been under
that illusion and and I got to see
myself through that lens and then I
began to wake up and see that I
completely transcend. It was an
interesting perspective. I'm glad I took
it seriously. I'm going to throw off
that headset. We call it death, but I'm
going to take off that headset pretty
soon because that's not who I am. I
transcend that.
So, the answer is you can know it, but
but you know it when you let go of all
concepts and you don't try. If you're
trying to get there, then you don't see
what you already are. That's that that's
the best answer I can give at this at
this point because it does transcend
science.
>> So, in terms of a god, as we believe in
gods in the religious context, the best
answer that you have would say that
effectively we are god, the god that we
we refer to, we are the transcendent
power that goes beyond description.
And
>> Right. Yeah. I I would say that and and
I can I mean I can put that in sort of a
Christian language um because many
listeners will be Christians. Um
a child of a human is a human.
The Bible calls us children of God.
Well, if a child of a human is human, a
child of God is God. That's what the
what what is point to and and Jesus is
fairly explicit about it. When
some religious leaders were about to
stone Jesus for saying that he was the
son of God,
Jesus quotes the scripture and says
from I think the the Psalms or something
like that. He says, but in the Psalms it
says, "I have said you are gods and all
of you are sons of the most high." And
Jesus said, "If if he calls them gods to
whom the word of God came, why are you
trying to stone me to death for just
saying I'm the son of God?" What what
the Bible is basically saying, love God
with all your heart. That it's loving
yourself. You are God. And loving your
neighbor as yourself is just recognizing
that your neighbor is yourself under a
different avatar.
>> Do you think Jesus was really divine in
any I'm presuming you think this was a
real individual and do you think he was
divine beyond beyond me and you in some
respect?
>> Not beyond me and you, but you're you
are as divine as could possibly be.
>> Thank you so much.
We'll clip that. I'll put that on my
LinkedIn.
>> Hoffman said it.
>> Yeah. Little recommendations.
>> You're divine. Hoffman says, "I'm as
divine as I could possibly be."
>> Are there any um Are there You must go
if you if you understand
reality through this lens that we're
seeing so little and that much of it is
created by by ourselves and um we are
the transcendent. Are there any things
that you do on a day-to-day basis that
are atypical because of that or thoughts
you have or experiences you have that
are atypical because of this
perspective?
Certainly atypical from before in my own
in my own life. I now spend um
quite a bit of time in meditation
because I I as much as I enjoy the life
of the mind and I'm you know I a
professor and I've taught lots of
students over many many years
and I highly recommend all that stuff.
At some point I realize that all my
knowledge all possible scientific
knowledge is 0% of reality. And do I
really want to confine myself only to 0%
of reality? I want to explore reality
from this perspective but it is 0%. So I
do my homework and I encourage my
students do more homework take this
perspective very seriously study it
study it rigorously but then realize
there's this the 100% that you haven't
seen and you are it.
>> So are you doing lots of psychedelics
and stuff like that to
>> I haven't done any psychedelics.
>> You've never tried psychedelics?
>> I I I've never I've never even smoked a
cigarette.
>> Wow. I I and I haven't had a drink of
alcohol in in decades. So I I and it's
partly just because I'm I'm frail. My my
physical body isn't that strong. I I I
have limits to what I can't push my body
too hard. So I' I've learned to operate
within my own limits and I don't push it
too hard. But the meditation I do.
>> Am I right in thinking that you now
meditate 3 to four hours a day?
>> Probably. Yeah. What insights or
understandings have emerged from that
that I might be able to comprehend?
>> Any creativity that's ever come out in
my scientific work
toever to whatever extent it's creative,
it's come from the silence. So I've of
course I've had to do my homework and do
my studies and so forth. But the novel
ideas
come from the silence. Personally,
one one thing I've seen is how
identified I am with my avatar.
I think I am this body. I'm really tied
to this body. And it's
the stuff that I'm saying
at the emotional level. There's an
emotional part of me that doesn't
believe it one bit.
Emotionally, um, you put a gun to my
head, I'm scared to death.
>> Intellectually, I'll say say to you,
this is just an avatar. I I'm the
infinite that transcends.
So, and when I die, I just and and I
believe that. How deeply do I believe
it? Put a gun to my head and you'll find
out. I'll wet my pants. So, it's it's
it's very very interesting for me to
look at that and to see all the
disjunctions, the the the the things
that are disjointed in in in my my
worldview. Well, it kind of makes sense,
right, based on your theory that our
senses have evolved to help us to
survive because someone not liking your
thinking or your theories or rejecting
you or harmed your body, it would go
against your survival. So theoretically,
if we are in the world that you've
described in the reality you've
described, which is basically designed
for survival, then you would have
developed senses that make you change
behavior if there's a risk of someone
not liking you.
>> That's right. there there are social
pressures and and if we don't conform to
them, you get feedback that that can be
very very negative and in some cases
even death. Um if I if I go to a grocery
store and and don't happen to pay and
just walk off with the stuff, I end up
behind bars. There are rules of the
game. There are rules of the headset. I
transcend the headset, but I choose to
allow myself to get lost in the game.
Starting in January 2020, you
did have a proverbial gun held to your
head in in a way because you contracted
COVID and went through and are still
going through some pretty um serious
health complications because of long CO.
You developed heart heart issues within
weeks requiring hundreds of hours of
critical care in hospital. You told me
before we started recording that you've
had heart surgery twice.
>> Yeah. Um, in 2021 at 66 years old, at
one point you thought you might not
survive because your heart had been at
190 beats per minute for 30 hours and
you sent your wife a goodbye message
>> because it looked like it was all over.
>> Right. Right. I am wondering what that
brush with death
did to your perception of life, your
perspective, and how that all ties into
your your um your beliefs about the
nature of reality.
>> It certainly let me see how tied I am to
my body and the fear that I that I
experienced. Right? It's one thing for
me to sit here as a nice academic and
talk about how you're the transcendent
reality. It's another thing to have your
heart fail and to know that this is
probably the end and and to face the raw
emotions. So I had deep ra then I had to
have another surgery. I um the first one
kept me for a year and a half or so. A
great surgeon is not his fault. He did a
great job but you know CO is persistent.
And the week before my second surgery I
was in the ER three times where they had
to restart my heart. Just didn't know if
I was going to make it. I I would have
to go have my heart restart and then two
days later go back and have my heart
restart and I was just hoping to make it
to live to the surgery. Um and and even
now I wouldn't be surprised if the heart
starts to to go bad again. So so that
takes us out of the abstract academic
realm into something very very concrete
on how do you deal with the fact that
you really don't know from one heartbeat
to the next.
It keeps you from just talking
abstractly about this stuff and and and
and being real about it is what do I
really feel about it? And and when I
look inside and see there's real fear,
then I know, okay, um this stuff about
um you're the infinite and everybody
else is the infinite is still fairly
just an abstract concept for you, Don.
You haven't really gone deep enough. You
need to go deeper and actually if that's
true, I mean maybe it's all BS, right?
But if it's true that you are the
infinite and everybody else is the
infinite um then you need to go deeper
into that. Um and and I intellectually
I'm I'm convinced. I mean I've given you
the reasons. Intellectually I'm quite
convinced. Um and it's it's really
interesting to me that emotionally I'm
far from convinced. I'm far and I agree
with what you just said about the
evolutionary arguments for it. there's
good evolutionary reasons for me to be
wired up to have automatic emotional
responses that are going to protect this
body to keep it. So, no, no doubt about
it. So, so there's no reason to judge
myself that I'm a, you know, my body has
a fear response and so forth when there
are things that that are about to to
kill me. The issue is then when I look
at that fear response, can I look at it
and accept it or do I identify with it?
Do I identify
with the fear response or can I step
back and be the observer that watches
the fear response? And in in the
meditation process, what I'm learning to
do
is
in some sense what I was saying about
the science, science is great, but don't
believe any theory.
Theories are just tools. They're not the
truth. No scientific theory, my theories
included, are not the truth.
And so also is my theory about who I am
not the truth. So to really let go of
any theory, if I can really let go of
any theory of who I am,
then I'll let go of any fear. So it's
really it's really comes down to to this
what's really really quite interesting.
We will each die. That's
incontrovertible.
So
any attachments I have to this world
will cease.
There's no doubt. The question is can I
let go of the attachments now or will
they only
go for my cold dead hand?
>> When will I let go of all these
attachments? If I my to the extent and I
am no
expert but to the extent that I can let
go I see that there's more peace there's
more peace in letting not being attached
to things so I I I see that but but I'm
not there. So this is a very human very
human perspective on things a very
fallible perspective and it's very very
interesting. So I'm claiming I'm the
infinite and I'm the infinite having
taken on this this bodily form and
in some sense I'm waking up to who I
really am but I'm only partly awake. I
started my first business at 12 years
old and I started more businesses at 14,
15, 16, 17 and 18. And at that time,
what I didn't realize is that being a
founder with no money meant that I also
had to be the marketeteer, the sales
rep, the finance team, customer service,
and the recruiter. But if you're
starting a business today, thankfully,
there's a tool that wears all of those
hats for you. Our sponsor today, which
is Shopify. Because of all of its AI
integrations, using Shopify feels a bit
like you've hired an entire growth team
from day one, taking care of writing
product descriptions, your website
design, and enhancing your products
images, not to mention the bits you'd
expect Shopify to handle, like the
shipping, like the taxes, like the
inventory. And if you're looking to get
your business started, go to
shopify.com/bartlet
and sign up for a $1 per month trial.
That's shopify.com/bartlet.
So when we do die in your
perspective, is that equivalent to sort
of taking the headset off
>> entirely?
>> And so when we die, we take the headset
off and
>> That's right.
>> The consciousness still remains, I
assume.
>> That's right.
>> So how would one am I going to when I
die, am I going to float up and be in
like a heaven? Am I going to go into a
tree? Am I going to become a bug? What's
going to happen with that consciousness?
Is it going to be this or is this just a
bunch of labels and stories?
>> Question. The answer is I don't know.
But but I but I I will speculate. Having
said I don't know. And and being honest,
I I'll I'll speculate. I suspect that
the closest I can get to that is what
happens in meditation. When I really do
let go there and and and it's very very
quiet and my eyes are closed
then there's there is awareness and it's
a very alert awareness very very
conscious and it has no content. There's
no colors no tastes no smells there's no
content and
no need.
It's it's it's
an awareness that can create all this in
an instant
and it can let it go. So it's it's
so so
it it is the
the closest you can get to answering
your own question is really just to sit
in silence. And it's it's hard because
the thoughts will come and come and come
and letting go of all thoughts is is is
the difficult one. But when you do that,
then I think that's the closest I can
give to the answer to your question.
>> We spend a lot of time debating whether
this god is real or whether this thing
is real or whether horoscopes are real
or whether
>> this spiritual belief is real or karma
or dharma or reincarnation,
>> right?
>> In your perspective then is it somewhat
ignorant to set your stall up anywhere
to say that something is or isn't true?
Because you know people are different
sides of the spectrum. Some people are
like you know staunch staunchly
religious and then others are staunchly
atheist.
>> Right. Right. Right. I I think that
of course like in science there are
certain things that are just plain
nonsense. Someone in in fact most of the
stuff that you just casually come up
with and you my theory of electricity or
my theory of the atoms it's just not
it's just plain nonsense and and goes
nowhere. It's not worth any time. So I
suspect the same thing is true in
spiritual stuff where we have even fewer
guard rails on our theories. But I think
there are a few guiding stars. If it
involves loving your neighbor as
yourself, you're on the right track. If
it involves putting a barrier between us
and them and saying that they're bad and
we're good, you're probably on the wrong
track.
>> What does this mean for grief? So many
people are losing loved ones as we speak
or are contending with the reality that
they are going to lose a loved one. What
does it mean for the nature of love?
Does it, you know, does it take anything
away from love? Does it add to love?
Does it
>> strengthen love? Well, I would yeah, I
think in some sense it comes down to
love is the central thing and uh and you
know in Christianity Jesus that's I'm
talking about that because you know my
dad was a pastor and I that's the one I
was raised in. So I I know the most
about that. So I'm speaking only because
that's where I had some background
and and and when Jesus would ask what's
the most important thing he basically
said love God with all your heart love
your neighbor as yourself. So love is
like
number one. And my guess is that's
really all you need. If if your religion
is love and that's it and that's then
that's how you act. You don't really
need to add anything more to that.
That's that's all you really need. Love
your neighbor as yourself.
You're done.
That's all that you need. And anything
beyond that is just not necessary. And
anything that contradicts that, I would
go back and try to figure out where I
went wrong in my religion.
>> I've been um asking my when I met my
girlfriend Melanie in her bio on
Instagram, it said, "God is love." Now,
she's not religious.
>> Yes.
>> She doesn't believe in a particular book
or whatever, but she when you I asked
her actually, funny enough, we had this
conversation last night.
>> Ah,
>> I said to her, "What do you think uh God
is?" And she said, "I think God is just
love."
>> And I I completely agree.
>> She's right again.
>> Yeah. And know I think that that's love
is the closest word that we can have to
to as a pointer. Again, it's just a
pointer. Whatever love is is just like
the word mint only points to the mint.
The word love only points but it I think
it's the best pointer that we have.
Love.
>> And what is that definition of the word
love? Because, you know, people use the
I love Manchester United, but the love
that you're describing seems to be much
more about a a oneness or or it's
basically just really recognizing
that that person, even though they have
a different color, a different race, a
different creed, a different idea,
that's just me.
That's me in a different headset.
And when I really then then I ask, well,
how would I want to treat me? I get the
right answer. That's love. How would I
if that's me, how how how would I treat
me if that were me? Well, when you get
the right when you do that, you're
acting in love. You're not going to beat
yourself up. You're not going to call
yourself names. You're you're not going
to call your call you whatever. You're
you're you're going to treat yourself
the way you want to treat yourself. then
treat others the same way and that's
that's what what love is. But ultimately
I think again these are all just
pointers. Whatever
love is ultimately transcends any
description. Do you believe I did kind
of ask you this earlier, but I was just
looking at some of the research around
how many people talk about these
near-death experiences specifically when
they more so when you have a cardiac
issue, people seem to say that they had
perceptions of hearing or seeing things
or passing into some kind of tunnel or
seeing some kind of light or a really
positive emotion.
>> Yes. I I wondered if you you know you
were at one point in your life thought
that you weren't going to make it and if
if with what you know you it's increased
your belief in these near-death
experience accounts that someone was
sort of transitioning from this reality
through taking the headset off. Like
it's almost like they took a little bit
of the headset off but not all of it and
then they came back to the headset. So
yeah, these very common experiences
about near-death um a light and a tunnel
and and maybe a life review and then a
choice to come back and things like
that. It's quite it's quite quite common
and I'm not going going to dismiss them
one one bit. I mean I it's hard to get
scientific evidence on that. It would be
very interesting to have a study in
which people did have their heart stop
for example were resuscitated and ask
how many don't have that experience be I
mean if we had a systematic study that
that that did that so we don't want to
be tricked by um paying attention to
only certain parts of the data right so
so so you can see um even though I talk
about letting go of concepts and and and
and going into the the unknown when when
it comes to things where where we should
do science then I'm very very hard-nosed
about it and and say here we need to do
to do studies and some I know some
cardiologists I'm not going to mention
names but that that have seen a lot of
this stuff and they're convinced by
their own informal experience that
there's something going on here so I I
have no you know no beef with that I I'm
I'm I think that they might be on to
something
so I don't disbelieve it but That's
different than having the science.
>> Why do we suffer in such a reality? Like
why would why would this transcendent
power create
organisms or perspectives that end up
suffering that end up in the worst of
places, the concentration camp, the
illness, the typhoid, the starvation?
Why would such a transcendent power or
consciousness do such a thing?
Um, so, so I'll try not to be shallow
about it, but because pain is
pain is pain and death is death and
certain deaths seem horrific. This is
a profound question.
I always feel like I'm risking being
trit and and and so forth because this
is anybody who's had serious pain knows
that you just you just can't
you can't play with this stuff. It's
it's it's when you when you're in that
pain, it really when you're with that
fear, it's it's it's
I think ultimately
it may be like the wounds you get in a
video game.
You get the wounds, your your avatar
gets killed and and and you're upset
about it in the moment because you're
losing the game and so forth, but but
then the game's over and and and you're
fine ultimately.
you're fine.
But
that experience, I'll put it, I don't
want to be in that experience.
It's striking that in Christianity, the
the deepest symbol of God is
horrific.
A crucifixion,
it's absolutely the pain. It's it's not
like a little shot to the head with a
gun or something like that. It's it's
it's making it as painful and as drawn
out and as horrific as you could
possibly do. And that and that's that's
you know when you see the cross that's
sort of so your your question is right
at like the heart of Christianity. It's
putting that right there and it's saying
this most perhaps the most horrific way
you can imagine a person dying.
That's what happened to Jesus and that's
our our symbol for the divine. So, so
that's why you know it's not trivial.
It's not it's not shallow. There's
something very very deep there. None of
us is volunteering to hop onto a cross.
I'm not volunteering to hop onto a
cross. So, so I I would say the the the
challenge of your question is the
challenge that is probably a deep
spiritual challenge to to all of us to
and I'll say to me personally, which is
to continue to grow up and be less and
less identified with this headset and
more
aware of my transcendent
being. Because ultimately, even on the
cross, I mean, perhaps the most profound
thing I've ever seen in Christianity was
Jesus words on the cross saying,
"Father, forgive them. They don't know
what they're doing." Right? That the
heart of Christianity is right there.
It's not like, "The heart of
Christianity is kill the disbelievers."
No, the heart of Christianity is the
disbelievers have pinned you on a cross.
They're killing you in the worst
possible way. And you show them love.
That's the heart of Christianity. You
show love to those who are in the
process of killing you in the worst way
they can think. That's the heart of
Christianity. Not killing disbelievers
or pushing away disbelievers or
discounting them. That's the opposite.
So there's something very very that's
why I'm very very slow in answering your
question because this this gets to the
very deep heart of Christianity I think
and and in in all true spirituality that
I don't think I truly understand. I I
see these pointers to it and I see that
it's real and that your your question is
pointing to one of the most profound and
important things and I I have the
feeling that my answer is
only ineffectually pointing part of the
way there. There's there's m much more
to it than I've been able to point to.
I'm hazarding a guess at what the role
of um yeah I'm hazarding my own guess at
what the role of pain and suffering
might be in such a
>> in such a reality where consciousness is
this transcendent thing that comes into
manifests itself as these organisms and
um
>> I guess it kind of goes in part goes
back to your idea of
>> I've only projected what I need to see
through my headset in order to survive.
So if there are survival dynamics in
play in my headset,
>> then one one element of survival is
suffering. Yes. Because
>> the fire is hot. So I put my hand in the
fire, my hand gets burnt. So don't do
that again, Steve.
>> Right.
>> So if that is if if that is the nature
of my headset, then there will need to
be cause and effect as it relates to
things that will help me to survive and
things that won't help me to survive.
>> Yes.
>> And so suffering might just be an input
or a stimulus in this
in this headset that helps me to
survive,
>> right?
>> And then I don't know the question
springs to mind is why does
consciousness care about survival? Why
would this transcendent consciousness
Maybe that's not even a good question.
Maybe that's the wrong question, but
why does why does it want to survive in
us? Why doesn't consciousness end? I
mean,
>> I agree. One one one thing that I've
heard from um one spiritual teacher in
Echartullah which is interesting on the
sigi one of his his talks he he he said
um
let's pretend that we're humans.
Oh that'll be fun
and and let's play some dramas. Oh but
to have dramas I have to forget who I
am. Okay. So then let me completely
forget who I am. And then after a few
hundred thousand years when I get tired
of it
then let's wake up. And I thought that
was
a profound pointer that that
doesn't get the whole thing but it it's
an interesting pointer. I think there's
more to it than that but there's it's
more than just playing dramas. I think
it's playing dramas
to further explore who I am by knowing
who I'm not. That may be part of it.
Knowing who I am by knowing different
perspectives and knowing that as rich as
this perspective is, I transcend that.
Someone commented on one of your recent
videos saying, "Imagine being a
character in a book trying to understand
your way out of that book into a higher
dimension."
>> Yes,
that's right. But but of course there
there's that's that's a great great
question. The the only thing I would say
is imagine being the author of the book
having written about a character because
I'm I'm I'm not just a character in the
book. I'm the I'm the author who's put
the character in the book that then
wakes up that that's identified with the
character and then wakes up and realizes
I'm not just the character. I I was
writing the whole book. So So that that
question is is good because it points to
a misconception. I'm not just a
character in the book. I'm the writer of
the book and the Hoffman is just one of
the characters in the book. And the
writer of the book is
>> the one consciousness that when it
really understands itself will love all
the characters equally.
>> How do you know we're not separate
consciousnesses?
>> I don't and that's an interesting by the
way I've got a mathematical model of
consciousness and that's a whole other
topic. I So you can either play the game
here understanding how is physical world
and consciousness related. How are those
two things related?
>> Most of my colleagues say physical world
is fundamental. Consciousness emerges
when right brain activity happens. So
>> so when neurons
>> neurons fire in the right way and so
forth for example
>> now as a scientist I always at these
conferences they know what I'm going to
do to them. I say still you claim that
conscious experiences come from
integrated information give me one give
me an experience and they can't
>> can they not say well look I'm looking
around right now and that's coming from
neurons in my brain in a physical
substrate. Oh, well yeah, they'll say
that and and but but they know what I'm
asking. What they're ask what I'm asking
for is I say give me the specific
pattern of neural activity that must be
the taste of mint.
>> Okay. Right. So you
>> what must it must be the taste of spot
the sequence of neurons or physical
interactions that cause me to taste
mint.
>> That's right.
>> So that's there's a big gap there
>> and then they have to explain
>> why that particular pattern. So first
they have to identify the pattern this
pattern.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> With this say integrated information
pattern must be the taste of mint.
>> By integration information pattern you
mean like this combination of things
coming together causes mint.
>> That's right.
>> They can't tell me the combination and
they can't tell me why that combination
>> causes mint.
>> So it's basically cause and effect.
They're saying they're saying something
happen here and then they're seeing an
outcome which is an experience but the
gap in between they can't explain.
>> That's right. And sometimes they'll say
that the conscious experience just is
the the dynamic whatever the physical
dynamics is. Okay.
>> But but but even then the the question
is why is this particular dynamics
associated with this conscious
experience?
>> Okay.
>> And and and for principled reasons. No
in science we tolerate no BS.
No BS. There's got to be a a concrete
reason. And that's why I I put a big
zero. I do this at the conferences
knowing that I'm one of very very few
non-physicalists at the conference and I
know that the physicists are out there
and I say you guys have got zero right.
They have a chance.
Floor is open. Tell me I'm wrong.
>> Mhm.
>> And I'm not. They know it. So start with
consciousness. Yeah.
>> Now I'm playing a different game. I'm
saying all this physical stuff. So
there's lots of physical stuff. There's
space and time. Einstein's special
theory relative general relativity.
There's the all the Bzons and firmians
and the lepttons
bzzons and bzons lepttons and quirks of
the standard model of of particle
physics.
You're you're saying spiritual guys that
you can start with a theory of
consciousness mathematical and you will
give me all of space-time equations.
You'll give me quantum field theory. You
will give me the standard model of
particle physics. How many points have
you put on the board guys? What have you
done?
Can you give me what pattern of
conscious agent activity must be a
photon? What pattern pattern of
conscious activity should be the
structure of spaceime or a bzon or a
lepton or a cork?
No points on the board. So, so you can
you can look at that and go from that
perspective it's equal. There's no
points on the board on either either
team. So when I'm I've got a theory that
I call conscious agent network theory
and I'm working on this with um Chayon
Pash.
>> How long have you been working on it?
>> You've got a book called observer
mechanics there that was published in
1989. So I've been on this for 40 years
about 40 years.
>> What do you think you're going to find
when you're what do you think you're
going to prove with your theory of
consciousness?
>> I think we can put some points on the
board in the following. I think we can
start with the theory of conscious
agents. I just gave presented a talk um
Friday and we we proposed what light is.
We proposed why the speed of light is
the same in all inertial frames.
>> What does this mean? You got to simplify
this for my 16-year-old brain.
>> Right. Right. Right. So, so if I'm on a
train and the train's going 50 miles an
hour and I throw a ball and I can throw
it maybe 20 miles an hour, then in some
sense the ball is going 70 miles an
hour, right? Mhm.
>> Right. And that's the way things
normally work. But if I have a
flashlight
and I'm
and I flash this the light is going at
the speed of light which is about
186,282
miles per second.
It's pretty fast.
If I got get on the train and have the
train like I take my flashlight go like
half the speed of light on the train. So
I'm going really fast. This is a fast
train. Mhm.
>> And I turn on my light and I'm I'm I'm
here outside. I'm looking at the train
going at half the speed of light and
someone's turning the flashlight on. So
the the light is going at the speed of
light. How fast is that light beam going
to look to me? Cuz I'm standing on the
site and the train is already going half
the speed of light. So how fast is that
light beam going to go?
>> The speed of light plus half the speed
of light.
>> That's what we would mostly think,
right? And it turns out no, it goes the
speed of light. If you have mass
and you're not moving at the speed of
light and we try to accelerate you to
get to the speed of light, you'll never
get there. That there's a speed limit.
You can't get there. So that's really
counterintuitive, right? But Einstein
said, "This is my fundamental hypothesis
on which I'm going to build my theory of
space and time is that light, no matter
how fast you're moving, always moves
away from you at the speed of light."
And also that there's no special
observer. There's no what what we call
no special inertial frame but no no
special frame of reference in which to
look at things all all frames are are
equivalent.
So so the question is how do I start
with a theory of conscious agents
>> which is that's a good question. So what
is a conscious agent? I I'll say it's
mathematical and I'll only talk about
one aspect of it. It's it's complicated.
So I'll talk about only an essential one
essential part of it and that is if you
are conscious you have experiences like
I have I can experience keep it real
simple I can experience colors red green
blue
>> mhm keep it very very simple so I
imagine a very very simple conscious
agent and what it can do is experience
three colors red green and blue that's
all it can do
>> like me
>> yeah of course you have a much richer
set of conscious experiences but but you
include that kind of observer right
because you can do red green and blue
>> and Now I'll talk about another observer
that only sees red and green.
>> Yeah.
>> And now you don't just see one color.
You see a color for a little bit and
then you see another color. Like so I
see red for a while, then I see green
and then I see blue and I maybe go back
to red or whatever. So there's going to
be this sequence of colors that I see.
And maybe the best I can say is that if
if I see green right now, then it's a
20% chance that I'll see red next and
80% chance that I'll see blue next. I
can I can write down probabilities.
Well, so that that's pretty simple,
right? There's colors,
experiences, and then there's
probabilities of what sequence you if I
see this experience, what my next
experience will be. And I'm using C in a
general term, right? It could be hearing
or smelling or whatever.
>> How do you capture that mathematically?
There's something called a markov
kernel, a mark of matrix that just says
basically it gives you all the numbers,
the first row of numbers, and says if I
see red now, what's the probability that
I'll see red next? Mhm.
>> What's the probability I'll see green
next? What's the probability I'll see
blue next? So, you just write the
numbers out. Maybe it's 0 2 that I'll
see red again, point four that I'll see
green, and then um point4 that I'll see
uh blue again. So, so and then the next
color, you know, I'll have another row
for if if I'm now seeing green, what's
probably I'll see red, green, and blue.
And then finally, blue was probably I'll
go to red, green, and blue. So, I need
nine numbers. That's only for three
colors. I need nine numbers to talk
about all the possibilities and then
I'll I'll just have a counter as well.
So every time I see a new color, I'll
just have a little counter. So I so see
red. Now that's one. Oh, now I see
green. That's two. Now I see green
again. I So that's three. So So I'm
counting the the colors, the
experiences. That's that's all I'm going
to talk about. That's all I have. The
question is if I start with just that
notion of an observer, it has colors and
a matrix of probabilities of I see this
color, I can see another color. What's
what's the probability? And every time I
see a new color, I get uh a counter
incrementing. That's all I'm going to
start with. Can I get Einstein's Can I
get that the speed of light is the same
in all inertial frames that the if I'm
on a train and I flash the speed flash a
light bulb flash of light that it will
go at the speed of light even for
someone um who's on the train going at
half the speed of light and I discovered
just in the last three or four months
that the answer is yes I can do it and
that's what I presented last Friday at
at this conference. So what does this
mean about the nature of consciousness?
And
>> it means that
starting with a theory of consciousness
outside of spaceime, I can actually give
you with mathematical precision the
structure of spacetime.
>> Which means that your belief is
>> we're starting to
>> space and time and everything I see and
experience actually comes from
consciousness itself. So consciousness
itself is the source of everything.
>> Everything that you That's right. So
earlier in our
>> consciousness didn't come from my brain.
>> That's right. My brain came from my
consciousness.
>> That's exactly right. That that that's
exactly what I'm saying. And we've
talked about the headset.
>> Yeah.
>> What I'm doing is I'm building the
headset. I'm saying here's the here's
the conscious agents, their dynamics,
and I'm now starting to build the
space-time headset.
>> Is there a concern that believing in
these things can make one go mad? I
think sometimes think that uh thinking
very deeply about who we are, why we're
here, how we got here, sometimes it
makes me I don't know like I lose a bit
of my orientation and I get a little bit
of a wobble like when I've had these
conversations about the simulation
theory and this being a big video game
and such I'm like well it kind of shakes
everything you know and these stories
that we've constructed our lives on give
us they anchor us and they orientate us
and they they give our life meaning so
>> if it's not true then I lose the meaning
of my life and I I worry if I risk going
bonkers.
>> Well, I I certainly empathize with that
and that's also what happens also in the
meditation process is also leads me to
have to face all sorts of emotional
stuff. My my deep belief that I'm just
my avatar and letting go of that is like
a death and it's it's very very painful.
So for me the meditation process is not
all love, joy and peace. A lot of it is
deep deep
tough emotions as I let go of what I
thought was myself. And that's it's it's
a kind of a it's a death of an illusion,
but it feels like a real death to me.
But now, here's the positive side.
Here's the upside. I'm proposing that
science
is got the tools, if we assume
consciousness is fundamental, to step
entirely outside of spacetime and do
serious mathematics
and show how spacetime is built as a
headset.
And this means I'm we're opening up a
realm of new technologies that are going
to make everything that we've done in in
science and technology so far seem
trivial and and the and here's the
here's the reason. Suppose you're a
wizard in Grand Theft Auto and you know
how to use all the tools in Grand Theft
Auto. That's fantastic. It's it's really
good. You can drive your car from A to B
faster than anybody can do.
But now, if you're the software engineer
who knows how Grand Theft Auto has been
because you wrote the code, you know it.
You can do miracles. You can take the
wizard's car and take the air out of
their tire just like that. You can take
the gas out of their tank. You can take
their car and move it from A to B
instantly. Not through Grand Theft Auto.
You can move it there instantly because
you got the code outside.
What I'm saying is
this is real. I started now to really
believe this. When I could get Einstein
spacetime coming out of this, I got
light and I think I've got an electron.
Now, I think we're reverse engineering
the headset and the technologies that
are about to come out of this will make
everything else seem like firecrackers
because we're now getting to a deeper
layer outside of the headset. We're not
we're not wizards inside the headset.
We're the software engineers that are
making the headset and now we can play.
So, for example, right now the nearest
galaxy,
the Andromeda galaxy, it's 2.4 million
lighty years away. If you hopped on a
light on a spaceship and probably to
send your offspring, it would take I
don't know how many gen thousands of
generations, I would guess, to get
there, then that's the closest that's
the closest galaxy. The the the universe
is much much bigger than that. That
that's just our little neighborhood.
It's not feasible. We're not gonna have
we're not going to be able to travel
with our current technologies inside
travel inside spaceime to Andromeda is
is not feasible for the foreseeable
future. What if we don't have to go
through spaceime? What if spaceime is
just a headset? It really is just a
headset and we don't have to go 2.4
million lighty years to get there. We
learn the code outside of spaceime and
we can just change the code. Just like
the Grand Theft, the Grand Theft Auto in
Grand Theft Auto, the car has to drive
through the roads to get from A to B.
But not if you look at the code. In the
code, I just need to change the value of
a register and all of a sudden the
position of the car is now at B. It was
at A and I put it at B.
>> Is this what time travel?
>> This this would be like this would
appear like immediate time travel or
immediate immediate space travel. Is
there anything within the laws of
physics that tells you that this is
impossible?
>> It's impossible inside spacetime. If if
you only use So inside spacetime, it's
impossible.
>> But outside of what we know about
spaceime,
>> a theory that's outside of spaceime that
properly contains
spaceime as a projection of the theory
allows us to then build technologies
that aren't restricted to spaceime. So,
>> do you think we're getting closer to
being able to do edit the code of
this experience so that we can do things
we never thought were possible and that
things that sit outside of what we know
know within the laws of physics?
>> That's exactly what I'm working on right
now. That's that's that is my research
project right now. That's what I'm
doing.
>> What are you hoping to do with this
research? And do you think about the
consequences of it?
>> I do. Uh so what first what I'm hoping
to do with the research I'm I'm what I'm
hoping to show is that I can get all of
quantum field theory, all of special and
general relativity, all of standard
model of particle physics from this
theory of conscious agents outside of
spaceime that we'll be able to explain
all of the laws that that we're that we
see and then show that space-time
theories are in fact a very tiny
projection of the much more
informationally rich dynamics of
conscious agents.
>> I've built companies from scratch and
backed many more. And there's a blind
spot that I keep seeing in early stage
founders. They spend very little time
thinking about HR. And it's not because
they're reckless or they don't care.
It's because they're obsessed with
building their companies. And I can't
fault them for that. At that stage,
you're thinking about the product, how
to attract new customers, how to grow
your team, really how to survive. And HR
slips down the list because it doesn't
feel urgent, but sooner or later, it is.
And when things get messy, tools like
our sponsor today, Just Works, go from
being a nice to have to being a
necessity. Something goes sideways and
you find yourself having conversations
you did not see coming. This is when you
learn that HR really is the
infrastructure of your company and
without it, things wobble. And Just Work
stops you learning this the hard way. It
takes care of the stuff that would
otherwise drain your energy and your
time, automating payroll, health
insurance benefits, and it gives your
team human support at any hour. It grows
with your small business from startup
through the to growth, even when you
start hiring team members abroad. So, if
you want HR support that's there through
the exciting times and the challenging
times, head to justworks.com now. That's
just.com.
You know, whenever someone talks about
editing genes, right, there's crisper
DNA technology that allows you to edit
genes or there's other technologies that
people talk about that allow you to
they're talking about putting, you know,
our memories on hard drives and stuff
like that. People get quite precious
with the idea of like playing with the
nature of reality too much because some
people might suffer. And even in your
perception of what the world is,
>> if we're all one consciousness, it it
becomes a slightly different
conversation. But I guess the question
I'm asking is if we were able to play
with the software of this thing that
we're all experiencing right now and do
things that sit outside the laws of
physics, is there a question of morality
of like is that the right thing to do,
will people suffer or if this is all
just code? Does is that just like a
pointless question?
>> Well, no. I think it's it's it's a very
important question and and I've
>> like is that the wrong thing to do?
>> It's like it's it's like Pandora's box,
right? Are we opening Pandora's box? All
sorts of nasty surprises that could come
out of the box once we open Go Beyond
Spacetime.
>> Like, who gets to open the box? If you
get to open the box,
>> that's that's what that's what I think
I'm doing. I I I have now the talk I
gave on Friday was saying, here's the
first peak inside Pandora's box.
>> But then you could become God as far as
we're all concerned because if you have
that power to play with the code,
>> well, it' be only the next level of God,
right? So,
as I've said, my theory is just a
theory. And so, it's not the truth. It's
just but it's it's more comprehensive
than the space-time theory. And so,
because I have a more comprehensive
theory, I can do new new technologies
that you couldn't do. So, so I I so I'm
not God, but I I'm outside of the limits
of spaceime. So I can give you new
technologies. If I if I can show how
spacetime arises entirely outside of
from this deeper theory, then if I'm
right
and I'm mathematically precise, that
means I have the tools to prove that I'm
right. That means I can make
technologies that will that will be
miraculous from within the space. Think
about the uh atomic bomb and how the
first nation to figure out that there
was new possibilities within technology
and because they had discoveries within
physics basically won the war. They were
able to
>> right
>> control every country um they became
effectively the god because they could
wipe anybody out within an instance.
>> Right.
>> It's like an analogy for how reimagining
physics creates new possibilities in
technology.
>> That's right. And and this is even I
bigger than that because nuclear bombs
will be like firecrackers compared to
what you can do with with a technology
that's utterly outside of space and
time.
>> You could do anything like that. You
could live forever, but that's not even
something that would really matter,
>> right? Once you realize it's just a
game, but but you could make you could
give yourself extra time as much as you
wanted in this. So it's the moral
question is a very very interesting one.
It's not it's not to be taken lightly.
Um either way and and ultimately it may
be very related to the question you
asked earlier which is about the nature
of why did the the one if there is a one
allow all this kind of horrible pain and
and and so forth. So I have a sense and
I can't defend it that
all is well. That even with the
technologies, even if the technologies
are
really far more powerful than anything
we've seen before, nothing can actually
hurt the reality of the one.
And all of the headsets are just
headsets. They're taken off anyway by
the one. They're just tried on and let
go. Apparently, the one even without all
this technology has already, you know,
put Jesus on the cross. If if that story
about the one is correct, then it's
given a thumbs up for choosing to do
that because that, you know, it it did
it
>> was created cancer and the Holocaust and
>> that's right. So
>> but the one's relationship with the pain
of its the things the organisms it's
create is different to the perception of
pain in the organism itself potentially.
So like I the hate pain, but maybe the
one the one consciousness that we all
share that we all returned to and came
from
might see it as a useful signal or might
not be subjectively bothered by it
because it's choosing to
>> to do that
>> to do that. I agree with you. That seems
to be a reasonable kind of conclusion.
And and in meditative practice, often
what you find is
and and I always risk pretending that
I'm further along than I'm not. So I'll
just say I'm I'm a neophite. But he but
so I'll talk about what I've heard from
other more advanced people that they
what was a deep pain emotional pain for
example when they stare at it and really
accept it it dissolves.
So now I'm speaking over my head but but
from people that I have no reason to
disbelieve.
>> I read a comment on your video from a
guy that wrote this. He wrote, "I'm a
schizophrenic. I do Door Dash for some
extra money. And one night, I arrived
and walked to the door. I placed the
food down on the door and I took a
picture. I got in my car and I drove
away. And 30 minutes later, the customer
called me and asked me where the food
was and I I told him exactly where it
was. I remember taking the picture on
his doorstep. So, he took it up with
Door Dash directly. Sometime later, I
opened my back door and I saw his order
on my back door. I was so confused why
it was there. I remembered everything
about going there and taking the
picture.
>> He said I was never there on his
cameras. Apparently, I hallucinated the
whole delivery.
>> I was there, but must have never left
the car or even drove up.
What was I doing then? Was I staring
blankly at the windshield with my eyes
glazed over? I called him and
apologized, but he but he already got
his refund. I felt so terrible. I'm on
medication and nothing works. It just
goes to show how easily some misfirings
in the brain can completely alter your
sense of reality, but it also poses
deeper questions about reality. Thought
it was an interesting um very
>> interesting point, but also just it also
speaks to when we talk about people that
have various mental illnesses like
schizophrenia that are experiencing the
world entirely differently. Um it raises
big questions about what consciousness
is again.
>> Absolutely. And and someone might take
that example and say, "Doesn't that show
that brain activity is causing
consciousness?" And you get the wrong
brain activity. Then you get these false
experiences and you get these illusions.
So the a lot of people take this as a as
a a victory point for the physicalist
point of view. But there's another point
of view and that is think think about
the experiences that you have when
you're dreaming. They can be very very
vivid
>> and and you're in a dream you are denovo
creating that reality that that's not a
reality that's that's there in front of
you. You're you're creating that
reality. So we know that you have the
you have the ability to
project a reality a very compelling
reality. All of us do without
schizophrenia. We do it every night in
our in our dreams. So no surprise that
that we do that. And the way I I view it
is that we um
it it's consciousness that's making this
particular headset. And it's
consciousness that uses the headset in
dreams to to make the the realities we
see in the dreams. And it's
consciousness that outside of spaceime
that also creates what we call the real
reality when when we're not dreaming.
And if you construct the headset in
certain ways, then you can get the
dreaming stuff mechanism, for example,
interfering with the what you'd call the
waking mechanism. and you could you know
effectively so I'm not saying
schizophrenic is is dreaming but I'm
saying I'm just giving this as an
example of the kind of thing that could
be I'm not giving an diagnosis of this
particular person
>> I'm about to uh leave this chair as are
you and I'm going to go back to my life
>> y
>> um where I'm building businesses I've
got a girlfriend I've got a team I've
got plans for the future I have all of
these things
my listeners they're sat at home they're
on the in a taxi on a plane train
walking in a gym wherever they might be
right now. And I I imagine that they're
also looking for a conclusion here, a
conclusive point of what all this means
for me in my life and the things I had
planned and
>> how I should show up and treat people
and and act. Can you give me the
conclusive point that all of this
teaches you and us about how we should
live our lives going forward if
everything that you've said about the
nature of reality is accurate?
>> Yeah. In a nutshell, I would say
the critical thing practically is love
your neighbor as yourself because your
neighbor is yourself.
And second,
reality is far more interesting
and exciting than you could ever
imagine.
So never think that you know everything.
Recognize that the moment you think you
know everything, that's the moment that
you're missing
the astonishing reality that you're a
part of. So, always have a childlike
curiosity. Always recognize that there's
infinitely more than you've ever
imagined so far. And that infinitely
more is you.
And on a point of removing some of the
stress and suffering from my life,
I think of course um
I first some humble pie is required. I
have stress and suffering. So I am not
speaking as someone who has transcended
stress and suffering. So I speak as
another fellow person with stress and
suffering that is still dealing with it
on a daily basis.
Given that the humble pie then I I will
say this
I think a lot of and I'll make it
personal. I think a lot of my problems
my stress a lot of my suffering is
because I believe illusions
to the extent that I believe that I need
to become something at all
need to be better than I am in any way.
need to prove anything to anybody else.
That's an illusion.
I'm already the infinite. I don't need
to prove anything. I'm making everything
is already. So I don't need to get
anywhere. I don't need to accomplish
anything. I don't need to succeed at
anything to become what I need to
become. I'm already that. So I don't So
the suffering comes from me forgetting
who I am. I don't need to I don't
actually need to impress anybody,
accomplish anything because everything
that I'm saying I'm already making this
all up. This is already me. I've already
done all this. What more do I need to
do?
>> I am transcendent.
>> I I am I'm completely transcendent of
this thing. And to the my suffering is
not recognizing that my suffering is
entirely
being caught in my avatar. This is just
my avatar. It's not me. So my suffering
is because I made this avatar. I let
myself on purpose be identified with the
avatar knowing that I would be suffering
because of that and and knowing that I
needed to wake up. So I'm suffering
because I'm identified with the avatar.
But I put myself in that place because I
really wanted to look at the world
through this avatar. That's why I'm
suffering. But eventually I wake up and
I look and I see the avatar for for what
it is. And I realized that everything I
was trying to do to prove that I was
worthwhile and I was better than you or
not not as bad as you think I am or
things like that. All that was was just,
you know, all the pain and suffering was
because of an illusion. But but I needed
to do that. I needed to look at myself
from that perspective for a while in
part to find out who I am by finding out
who I'm not. I'm not that just that
avatar.
Do you find yourself toggling back and
forward between this realization and
then the avatar,
especially when times are hard? Do you
find yourself reminding yourself in
difficult moments that this is just an
avatar and you're transcendent? Is that
a useful active practice in your life?
Cuz that's one of the things I take away
from this is when I walk over there and
I go on my phone or my laptop and I get
some shitty email, I could just remind
myself that this is all just
I'm transcendent and this is a game that
I'm playing and that will help me move
through that situation.
>> It is very practical in that way because
if it really is true, I mean, well,
we'll put it this way from a big
perspective, we're all going to die.
>> Mhm. And if I asked you, who was the
most rich and famous person in 1743?
Who knows? And who cares?
Same thing about us.
Thousand years from now, is anybody
going to know our name?
>> No. No.
>> Anybody going to care?
>> No.
So, so
that that's that's really important to
see. No one's going to care. And does
that mean that I'm I'm worthless? I'm
pointless. I'm I'm meaningless. No, it
means you're infinite and and this is
just one of the games you're playing and
and you're you're and and enjoy it and
enjoy. And don't try to get your
identity from this game.
In some sense, you're getting your
identity from finding out that you're
not this game. That's how you're
learning about who you really are is to
know I I thought I needed to be, you
know, for example, the CEO or the
professor or whatever it might be and
to, you know, get all these accolades
and and and so forth. and and that
motivated me for a while and then I
realized no one's going to really care
and in fact you know what I don't really
even care that was just a game I had to
play and I'm not that and I learned that
I transcend that so so it is practical
it's and it is practical in a very you
know in in some sense
life is full of all these irritations
things that go wrong all the time the
lesson of life is to just say yes to
whatever happens. Just this is what
happens.
This is what needs needs to happen. And
to not resist in some sense
you I am the infinite. I put myself in
this game and I am smart enough that I
it's a good game. So hey just go with
it.
So you know you know things go wrong.
Now, that's easy for me to say if you
ask me this when I'm on the ER, which I
was with my heart about to fail and so
forth. Now, I'm my my, you know, my
emotions are going crazy. I'm thinking
about my wife. I'm saying goodbye to my
wife
>> and and so forth. Um, it's hard to have
a nice dispassionate
>> thing going on like I'm talking about
now in in that situation. But I think
people more
further along than me in letting go of
identification with him. I'm still I'm
still tied to my avatar quite a bit.
Right? So that's so that's why I suffer.
But there are people I think spiritual
people maybe the Dalai Lama probably
Jesus um Echartola. There are people
like that who I think
really have disidentified from their
avatar and I think they probably just
don't suffer. They they might have
physical pain,
but they don't suffer.
>> Should love therefore be unconditional?
If we are if you are me, if we're the
same consciousness, if we are the same
transcendent source, doesn't that really
mean that I should love you? Really,
irrespective of what your avatar does
because we are the same thing.
>> Well, I would say unconditionally, yes.
And I would also say that Jesus said
that. G Jesus in
The sermon on the mount basically said,
"Do not judge."
Period.
>> I was looking at the um Luke 6:27. He
says, "Love your enemies."
>> Yes. Love your enemies. Right.
>> Do good to those who hate you.
>> That's right.
>> God's God's love for humanity is
unconditional.
>> Absolutely. And he said the same thing
about the people that were crucifying
while he's on hanging on the cross.
That is the you one of the most profound
images I've ever seen is a guy hanging
on a cross forgiving the ones who are
killing him right at that at that moment
and
that that's where it's real
>> in the Gita and Hinduism in the Gita
9:29 it says I am the same to all beings
he who worships me with devotion is in
me and I in him.
>> Juda Judaism says love your neighbor as
yourself.
>> Yeah.
>> Islam says my mercy encompasses all
things across all religions.
Unconditional love is not just an
emotion. It's a spiritual discipline and
a reflection of the divine. It means
loving without ego, expectation or fear.
The ultimate challenge and the ultimate
freedom.
>> I completely agree.
Yeah. And that's right. So there it's
it's really about letting go of
judgment. We we tend to judge other
people. So Jesus was very very clear
about that. He said don't judge. Period.
And and don't condemn other people. So
So for those who are followers of
Christ, if you judge somebody else, then
you're not following Christ.
>> Are you religious?
>> I'll put it this way. I was raised in a
fundamentalist Christian church. My dad
was a pastor for a while in in a church.
Um,
I my my own attitude about I I I
think that the Bible has good stuff in
it and I think that as I pointed out I
think it has bogus stuff that where they
say women can't talk in church. I think
it's completely bogus. So So I have to
have a nuanced view when I think when
Jesus says love your neighbor as
yourself. I think that that's deep and
and right.
And
I wouldn't say I'm I'm a card carrying
believer in any particular religion.
I am a believer that consciousness
the there is one consciousness and that
you and I are are it. And I think that
Buddha and Jesus and and Muhammad and
and
bunch of people were very very helpful
avatars to help other avatars sort of
wake up to their their true true nature.
uh
>> do you think much about AI? It's the
it's the topic of uh many conversations
these days. There's a lot of doom and
gloom around it. There's a lot of people
talking about efficiencies, but I
wondered if it at all sort of overlaps
with any of your work on the nature of
reality and the case against reality.
>> Very much. Very much so. I I thinking
about AI a lot since I've been in AI
since 1979. And
>> and you worked you took a class with the
guy who basically is known as one of the
inventors of AI.
>> Yeah. With Marvin Minsky, right? So and
and my all my research I did my um my
PhD research on list machines in the
artificial intelligence lab at MIT. They
were at the time very very powerful
machines for the for the for the time.
So I so I I've been with AI for for for
quite a while and
I'm very interested in the current state
of AI for the large language models are
doing great things and I use them
myself. They're very very helpful. Uh
they're also as powerful as they are
they're they're dumber than cucumbers
because they don't really understand
things. They they
have incredible memory. They've read so
much literature. ly and what all they do
effectively they're they're computing
lots of correlations. Beautiful what
they can do. It's amazing what you can
do with correlations but um they're not
they're not truly intelligent. There's
um some work by Carl Fristen and a new
company where they're using something
called active inference as a new way of
a new mode of doing artificial
intelligence. The the idea there is that
um I I should have a model of the world
where I can anticipate what's going to
happen and and not be surprised. And
that's sort of the the approach that
Fristristen is taking to and his company
is taking toward toward this. Um
intelligence is somehow about minimizing
surprise and minimizing surprise. Then
there's they have um a what they call a
free energy principle and and the
mathematical way of of doing but they're
trying to build a brand new kind of
artificial intelligence that gives you
that minimizes surprise where I've given
you an intuition why that why that's
intelligent and it's very intelligent to
minimize surprise but I'm surprised all
the time I'm pretty stupid right I don't
understand the world very well
>> but if I'm not surprised it's sort of
like wow I've got a really good model
especially if I'm doing all sorts if I'm
doing lots of stuff in the world and I'm
almost never surprised boy am I I'm
really intelligent. So, you can see why
that's a really good principle for
trying to build an AI, not just finding
correlations between everything, but
really something deeper. I
agree with that point of view. And it it
turns out this this logic that I
mentioned that I discovered
minimizes surprise.
So, I'm actually going to be using I'm
using this logic as as to build
spacetime. But I think it's going to
give an even more powerful approach. I
don't have to minimize some free energy
principle. I I have a more direct
computational way. So I'm I'm planning
to actually go back to my roots and and
after first I'm working on the
space-time headset, but if I live long
enough, I'm planning to actually go back
and build a completely new kind of AI
that that does this minimizing surprise
using the Marov chains.
>> So that means it will be
indistinguishable from consciousness.
was funny because it'll be based on my
model of consciousness. So, this is
going to be a model of intelligence
based entirely from a model which takes
consciousness as fundamental.
>> I mean, we get back to game theory
again.
>> That's right. we get back to the idea of
a simulation in terms of like if if
you're able to create a piece of
software that is able to replicate and
is built on the fundamentals of
consciousness.
Then it's going to think it's conscious
potentially and then
all of this stuff we you know begins
again and the cycle continues and maybe
that consciousness will get to a point
as well where it then discovers these
rules and creates a consciousness and
the cycle continues.
>> That's a that's a great question and I I
think that people should really pay
attention to the way you said and I
think that's a really good way of
thinking about it. But now I'll add a
little twist from from the point of view
in which I'm saying I'm starting with
consciousness being fundamental and I'm
discovering these rules and so I'm not
going to build an AI. Effectively what
I'm doing is I'm saying I can take
consciousness and use consciousness to
build a new headset.
>> Okay.
>> So consciousness is fundamental but I'm
using it in some sense to build a new
headset.
>> Well, we could play with consciousness.
So I could phys I could theoretically
put on that headset
>> Yeah.
>> and do anything I wanted to do. I could
go anywhere and do anything. Well, more
flexibility
>> like a dream I could play with and
influence.
>> That's right. Absolutely. Yeah. I would
just say I don't know if we can do
anything because remember my my my
theory of consciousness is just a theory
of consciousness. It's not consciousness
and it's only it's really only a first
baby step. I presume I that that my
theory will be transcended and there'll
be a much deeper theory of consciousness
and then that will be transcended and
and so forth. So what we will have is
the the generation of headsets that we
can get with with Hoffman's trivial
theory of consciousness which will look
trivial once we get to the next
generation of consciousness which will
look trivial once so in other words this
is never ending.
>> What an interesting future we face.
>> All one of us.
Donald, we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for. And the question left for you
is,
>> what would you do if you knew you could
not fail? What would you say, do,
become?
I'd probably
do what I'm trying to do right now,
which is to show how all of
modern physics falls out of a theory of
consciousness
and
develop the technologies that would come
out of that. and and and and the reason
is
of course that's fun. So one reason is
it's fun but the other reason is why do
most of us not take spirituality too
seriously
because the physicalist science gives us
all the technology. It works and
spirituality doesn't give us any
technology. It doesn't work.
So if you're just hard-nosed about it,
you go, "Well, spiritual stuff that
sounds really good, but what does it
build?" Nothing.
Physical stuff say, "Oh, we maybe don't
need the spiritual stuff." And look what
they they give us our laptops and
electricity. And so, but what if we
change the game and all of a sudden the
spiritual theory gives us technologies
that are impossible with a theory that
says that spaceime is fundamental. Brand
new. All of a sudden the game has
changed. Now the technological advantage
goes to those who say that spacetime and
physical stuff inside spaceime is not
fundamental. Okay? So now it's no longer
the smart person who is a physicist. is
the smart person who says all of the
evidence from science and technology is
in favor of something beyond spaceime.
>> So maybe those people weren't crazy
after all.
>> That's right. They just didn't have the
tools
to show what it could do.
>> Donald, thank you so much for doing the
work that you do. It's um it's so
incredibly important because it once
again challenges the paradigm, the box
in which we live and it asks us and uh
invites us to consider something beyond
that. Actually, when we think about all
human discovery that's moved us forward,
it starts with someone who's willing to
um suggest that there might be more to
know. And that's exactly what you do.
You make me feel dumb because you make
me realize that you make me question all
of the assumptions that I've built my
life on. And actually, in doing so, one
of the great byproducts of that is you
can start to realize that some of the
things you've constructed cause much of
your suffering and that those things are
um not necessarily true. And if and if
those things aren't true, then I have
greater choice and option op optionality
over how I feel, how I experience the
world, um the choices I make, the
feelings I have, and the life that I
live. And that's actually freeing for me
to to to realize that the um the cage,
the prison that I see and that I
experience might not be all that there
is. And I highly recommend everybody
goes and checks out your book if you
want to dive deeper into these subjects.
It's called the case against reality.
How evolution hid the truth from our
eyes. And there's a quote on front of it
from Deepak Chopra who's a former guest
that says, "Read this book carefully and
you will forever change your
understanding of reality. It's ex it's
exceptional. It's um it's ac accessible
and it's um it creates wonder which I
think is um is the path to a wonderful
life. So, thank you so much, Donald, for
the work that you do."
>> Thank you, Steve.
>> Truly fascinating and and thank you for
helping me simplify some of these
concepts so that we could all understand
them.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]
Oh,
hey.
[Music]